JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Brexit in the balance.
The U.K. Parliament rejects Prime Minister
May's latest plan to leave the European Union
at the end of the month.
Then: grounding the fleet.
The U.S. continues to permit the Boeing 787
MAX jets to fly, as Europe and others countries
ban them from the skies.
And varsity blues.
Dozens of parents and coaches are indicted,
after a federal investigation into widespread
college admissions fraud at elite universities.
Plus, we return to the southern border, this
time in Mexico, to examine the harsh conditions
and uncertainty faced by migrant families
waiting to enter the U.S. legally.
MARTIN SALGADO AMES, Director, Casa del Migrante
(through translator): Until a few months ago,
the majority of the population that came to
this shelter were men, mainly men.
But this started to change drastically when
violence and unemployment started to increase.
Then entire families started crossing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Britain's Parliament has issued
a stunning new statement on Brexit tonight:
It won't buy the prime minister's plan to
leave the European Union.
What it will buy instead is anything but clear,
after rejecting her plan by nearly 150 votes.
Special correspondent Ryan Chilcote reports
from London.
THERESA MAY, British Prime Minister: If this
vote is not passed tonight, if this deal is
not passed, then Brexit could be lost.
RYAN CHILCOTE: The future of Britain's exit
from the European Union was on the line in
day-long debate, as was Prime Minister Theresa
May's political career.
May spoke with a hoarse voice that underscored
her exhaustion from a last-ditch effort to
push her amended Brexit deal through Parliament.
THERESA MAY: I believe it is absolutely imperative
for this House that we meet the decision that
was taken by the British people in June 2016,
that we deliver on that referendum, and that
we deliver Brexit for the British people.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Her original Brexit plan suffered
a resounding defeat by a historic margin back
in January.
MAN: The ayes to the right 242, the no's to
the left 432.
RYAN CHILCOTE: With that weighing on her mind,
the prime minister made an 11th-hour trip
to Strasbourg, France, last night to seek
new concessions from the European Commission's
president.
They reached legally binding changes on one
of the deal's main sticking points: the so-called
Irish backstop that would ensure the border
between E.U. member Ireland and the United
Kingdom's Northern Ireland remains open after
Brexit.
Britain's objective: for the U.K. not to be
tied to the E.U. and its trade rules indefinitely,
should they be unable to agree on the nature
of their future relationship.
Right now, the border between Northern Ireland
and the Republic of Ireland is all but invisible.
That means cars and goods can cross freely.
May's original Brexit strategy would have
kept that border open.
THERESA MAY: A joint instrument with comparable
legal weight to the withdrawal agreement will
guarantee that the E.U. cannot act with the
intent of applying the backstop indefinitely.
RYAN CHILCOTE: But that assurance also came
with a warning
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER, President, European Commission:
In politics, sometimes you get a second chance.
It is what we do with this second chance that
counts, because there will be no third chance.
There will be no further interpretation of
the interpretations, and no further assurances
of the reassurances.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Then, this morning, Britain's
attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, took the wind
out of May's sails, issuing a legal assessment
that the changes reduce, but do not eliminate
the risk the U.K. could remain trapped in
a trade union with the E.U.
GEOFFREY COX, U.K. Attorney General: The question
for the House is whether, in the light of
these improvements, as a political judgment,
the House should now enter into those arrangements.
However, the matters of law affecting withdrawal
can only inform what is essentially a political
decision that each of us must make.
RYAN CHILCOTE: The magnitude of that political
decision fueled passionate debate in Parliament.
MAN: The honorable gentleman's cheeky, chappy
chortling and chuckling away from a sedentary
position, but it's been made perfectly clear
that the prime minister's not giving way.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Opposition Labor Party leader
Jeremy Corbyn was among those who rejected
the deal.
JEREMY CORBYN, Leader, Labor Party: After
three months of running down the clock, the
prime minister has, despite very extensive
delays, achieved not a single change to the
withdrawal agreement.
Not one single word has changed.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Opponents again zeroed in on
the so-called Irish backstop.
MAN: If, in December 2020, alternate arrangements
aren't found for the backstop, we will have
a hotel California Brexit, where we will have
checked out, but we won't be leaving.
RYAN CHILCOTE: And, critically, many of May's
own allies, like Northern Ireland's Democratic
Unionist Party, refused to support the divorce
agreement.
With her coalition crumbling around her, Prime
Minister May's Brexit strategy failed to win
passage.
MAN: The ayes to the right 242, the no's to
the left 391.
So the no's have it.
The no's have it.
RYAN CHILCOTE: This evening, Prime Minister
May voiced her own frustration after the fateful
vote.
THERESA MAY: I profoundly regret the decision
that this House has taken tonight.
I continue to believe that by far the best
outcome is that the United Kingdom leaves
the European Union in an orderly fashion with
a deal.
RYAN CHILCOTE: As for the European Union and
its leaders, they're saying, look, there have
been months and months of negotiations.
The U.K. decided to leave the European Union
two-and-a-half years ago.
They're holding firm, and they're saying they're
not going to renegotiate the terms of the
U.K.'s exit from the E.U.
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Ryan, what a spectacle.
Tell us what's next.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Well, tomorrow, the Parliament
is going to vote on whether the U.K. should
exit the European Union without a deal with
the E.U.
She doesn't think that's a good idea.
That said, there are people who support Brexit
that think it's a good idea, that actually
the U.K. would have more autonomy to pursue
the kind of trade deals it would like the
pursue.
Now, if that didn't get supported, if the
parliamentarians say, no, we do have to have
a deal, then on Thursday, they will have another
vote where they will be asked whether the
deadline, the March 29 deadline, when the
U.K. is supposed to leave the E.U., whether
that should be extended, pushed back.
So, two more votes coming quite possibly this
week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so, Ryan, I know there
are a number of directions this could go,
but what are the options after this?
RYAN CHILCOTE: So the two logical options
are, one, that the U.K. chooses to pursue
a new deal with the European Union.
Now, right now, the E.U. is saying they're
not going to renegotiate the exit terms.
However, the E.U. would love if the U.K. came
back with a softer Brexit, if they wanted
to leave the E.U., but have a closer relationship
after that with the European Union.
That would require the prime minister to reach
across party lines, if you will, to the leader
of the opposition, Jeremy Corbyn, and do some
kind of deal that they have already said that
they would support, a softer Brexit.
That seems pretty difficult to imagine.
You know, they really don't like one another.
There isn't that kind of bipartisan love,
if you will, to see something like that happen.
The other option is that this goes back to
the British people, a second referendum.
They could be asked, do you support the prime
minister's deal that she reached with the
European Union?
Obviously, it's just been rejected by the
Parliament, but the people would be asked.
Or do you think the U.K., in fact, now that
we know what we know, should remain in the
European Union?
Those are really the only two options on the
table -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The drama continues.
Ryan Chilcote, reporting for us from London,
thank you, Ryan.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we continue our look at
today's vote and where the U.K. goes from
here with Sir Peter Westmacott.
He had a 40-year career in the British Diplomatic
Service and he served as his country's ambassador
to the United States.
Sir Peter Westmacott, welcome back to the
"NewsHour."
So, what does today's Parliament vote, rejecting
this latest plan, what does it mean for the
prospects of Britain leaving the E.U.?
Is it now more likely or less likely?
PETER WESTMACOTT, Former British Ambassador
to the United States: Well, we are now in
a state of some political meltdown, as your
correspondent was just explaining.
I think at the moment it means that it is
less likely that we leave on the 29th of March,
as scheduled, because of today's vote, which
was resoundingly against Theresa May's package,
but also because, tomorrow, parliamentarians
are very likely to vote heavily against the
idea of leaving with no deal.
So, if you haven't got Theresa May's deal,
and you haven't got no deal, then what have
you got?
Answer, on the third day, on Thursday, there
will be a vote about whether to ask for an
extension of the 29th of March deadline from
the European Commission.
And at the moment, that is what is most likely
to happen in the near future.
So I think leaving on the 29th of March is
feeling a little less likely than it was before
tonight's vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're saying parliamentarians
tomorrow likely to say, OK, we need some kind
of deal if we're going the leave, the question
is, what does it look like?
PETER WESTMACOTT: Well, it's not even as clear
as that, I'm afraid, Judy.
What the parliamentarians will like say is,
we don't like the idea of what is crashing
out with no deal, because it would be chaotic
in a whole lot of different ways.
And neither the European Union nor the United
Kingdom is ready for that.
But what they're not saying is what they would
like, and that's part of the prime minister's
frustration.
She rushed off to Strasbourg over the weekend
to try and put a few improvements to her package,
but, unfortunately, without checking first
with her own law officer, the attorney general,
thought that the package would do the trick.
And he then opined this morning, saying it
doesn't give the legal guarantees that she
had hoped for.
And so result was the Parliament said, this
isn't good enough.
So we're a bit stuck in that sense.
The most likely thing, therefore, is extending
the timetable, if the European side will agree.
And a lot of the signs today -- this evening
-- since the vote, are that the European Commission
and the European member states are not giving
this away for nothing, that they will have
their own views as to how long the extension
might be.
And there may be some conditions that are
not to the liking of the United Kingdom.
So you could still end up crashing out, but
it feels to me it is not so likely that it
will happen on the 29th of March because there
is likely to be a vote for an extension, if
the Europeans agree to it, on Thursday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Peter Westmacott, why has this
been so messy and so difficult?
What's at the core of what's going on here?
PETER WESTMACOTT: The core of it, Judy, is
that it was always going to be very, very
difficult.
You can decide if you have got a box of eggs
in front of you whether you want to scramble
them, fry them, poach them or whatever it
is.
But once you have scrambled them, unscrambling
eggs is really difficult and a hard thing
to do.
And many of us, of course, said that at the
time.
But fast-forward to the results of the referendum.
But one of the problems is that Theresa May
decided that, in order to get herself a fresh
mandate and a bigger majority, she would hold
a general election, when she didn't need to,
18 months or so ago.
And she lost her majority with it.
And so now she's totally dependent on getting
any business done in the House of Commons
on 10 votes from Northern Irish members of
Parliament.
And, frankly, it's clear that if the law officer
this morning, if the attorney general had
said it was OK legally, probably, those 10
Democratic Unionist Party M.P.s would have
said, we can live with it, and probably enough
of the Conservative Brexiteers would have
gone along with it as well.
So she is somewhat held hostage by these 10
votes in Northern Ireland because of the fact
that she lost her majority earlier on.
So that's made the government's position politically
extremely fragile all the way through.
Added to that, I think the Conservative Party,
never mind the majority, or the lack of, has
had real difficulty working out amongst themselves
what sort of Brexit they want.
They have been riven in two, indecisive, unable
to sort things out.
And so there's been a great deal of muddle
over the last 2.5 years, to the frustration,
I have to say, of a lot of the British people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is that any one person's
fault, or is it just the fault of the system?
PETER WESTMACOTT: Well, you can point the
finger of blame on lots of people.
You can point the finger of blame, if you
wish to, at David Cameron for having called
the referendum in the first place, thinking
that he'd be able to win it if it happened.
You can point the finger of blame, if you
want to, to the prime minister, because she
is the head of the government which has conducted
these negotiations, to no avail, over the
last 2.5, three years.
Or you can point the finger of blame to some
very hard-line Brexiteers, who promised a
certain number of things at the time of the
referendum and afterwards which turned out
to be neither true nor deliverable.
And they have hung in there, making the prime
minister's life really extremely difficult.
So -- and you can probably think of a whole
lot of other people who you can blame for
it.
Some people would say the commission are being
intransigent.
I don't actually buy that, because it was
the British people who asked to leave.
And we're the ones who brought this upon ourselves.
And we asked for this Irish backstop, which
is the proximate cause of the defeat of the
prime minister's package.
And then we ask for it to be changed.
So I think it's a little harsh to say that
the people in Brussels have been inflexible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just very quickly, finally,
why should the rest of the world pay close
attention to this, the United States, the
rest of the global economy?
PETER WESTMACOTT: I think it matters to the
United States for two principal reasons.
One is that the United Kingdom is a very business-friendly
economy, which is the obvious port of entry,
especially for English-speaking peoples, to
the European single market.
And we have had lots of inward investment
from companies building in the U.K., investing
in the U.K. to get access to the E.U.
And if that is taken away by the terms of
the Brexit deal and -- or no deal, that will
be a problem.
Secondly, I think the United Kingdom in the
European Union is a force, if you like, for
the anglophone world.
It has been a means of trying to ensure that
some of America's points of view, policies,
preferences are transmitted to the European
Union.
And I think that could be lost when we leave,
how we leave.
And, thirdly, I think the European Union itself
is weakened.
Of course, I would say this, wouldn't I?
but I hear it from my French and German and
other friends.
If the U.K. is no longer there, and the only
two big powers in the European Union are France
and Germany, who often find it difficult to
agree on things, then I think the European
Union is weaker.
And the people who are rubbing their hands
are the people who are in the Kremlin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we are watching it all
very closely.
Peter Westmacott, we thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's other news: The
European Union and a growing list of nations
banned flights by Boeing's 737 MAX, after
an air disaster in Ethiopia.
Sunday's crash left all 157 people on board
dead.
In the U.S., Boeing defended the plane, and
the Federal Aviation Administration maintained
it is fit to fly.
We will delve into the details after the news
summary.
In Syria, Islamic State fighters are urging
supporters to launch vengeance attacks around
the world.
Several hundred die-hard fighters are now
under siege in Eastern Syria.
They posted a recording on social media today.
It tells followers to -- quote -- "rise against
the crusaders, and take revenge for your religion."
The government of Venezuela announced today
that it is investigating opposition leader
Juan Guaido over a nationwide power blackout.
The electrical outage began Thursday and continued
today.
President Nicolas Maduro went on national
TV last night to blame the United States and
Guaido.
The nation's chief prosecutor followed up
today.
TAREK WILLIAM SAAB, Venezuelan Chief Prosecutor
(through translator): What happened last week,
this electrical sabotage, is not a casual
event.
What I am telling all of you is that it is
part of a growing number of events, each time
larger, to knock out a legitimately elected
government.
Where are the supposed calls to dialogue,
agreement, coexistence?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Guaido blames corruption and
mismanagement for the blackout.
Meanwhile, U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo
said last night that all remaining American
diplomats will leave Venezuela.
He said their presence had become a constraint
on U.S. policy.
And the American special representative, Elliott
Abrams, promised today that significant new
sanctions are coming soon.
The United Nations reports that at least 535
people were killed in Western Congo over the
course of three days in December.
Investigators say it happened in Yumbi territory
when members of one group attacked a rival
group with guns and gasoline.
The report says that the campaign may amount
to crimes against humanity.
Back in this country, there is word that apprehensions
along the U.S. border with Canada are growing.
The Customs and Border Protection agency reports
that more than 4,300 people were detained
in 2018.
That is up more than 40 percent from a year
earlier.
During that same time, nearly 400,000 people
were apprehended along the U.S. border with
Mexico.
President Trump is facing yet another investigation.
It is widely reported that the New York state
attorney general's office has subpoenaed records
from two banks.
They involved real estate projects and Mr.
Trump's attempt to buy pro football's Buffalo
Bills in 2014.
His former lawyer Michael Cohen has told Congress
that the president routinely overstated his
wealth when he was dealing with banks.
And on Wall Street today, stocks had a mixed
day.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 96 points
to close at 25554.
The Nasdaq rose 33 points, and the S&P 500
added eight.
Still to come on the "NewsHour": how governments
and airlines worldwide are responding to the
Boeing crash; an on-the-ground report from
the Mexican side of the southern border; federal
investigators charge dozens for widespread
college admissions fraud; a Chicago activist
on ending gun violence; and much more.
The push to ground the kind of Boeing 737
jet that crashed this weekend has grown around
the world.
But here in the U.S., the FAA and the airlines
say they still believe in the plane's safety.
There's a fair amount of criticism and questions
about that decision.
John Yang begins with this report.
JOHN YANG: Dozens of countries, including
all nations in the European Union, have grounded
the Boeing 737 MAX 8 and banned them from
their airspace.
That's on top of at least 27 airlines that
have voluntarily taken the planes out of service.
The actions come two days after an Ethiopian
Airlines 737 MAX 8 crashed shortly after takeoff,
killing all 157 people on board.
Chinese officials said their ban would last
until U.S. regulators act.
LU KANG, Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokesman
(through translator): The CAAC has clearly
stated that they will ask Chinese aviation
companies to lift the ban on commercial operation
of Boeing 737 MAX 8 unless they are assured
by the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration
and Boeing company that they have taken related
measures to guarantee safe travel.
JOHN YANG: The FAA insists the planes are
safe.
They say they are closely watching the probe
of the Ethiopia crash.
U.S. investigators are on the ground, where
family and friends of the victims are sifting
through debris for remains and personal items.
Sunday's tragedy is the second deadly accident
in five months where a 737 MAX 8 crashed just
after takeoff.
In October, a Lion Air flight crashed, killing
all 189 people on board.
The cause is still under investigation.
Attention has focused on an automated flight
control feature designed to avoid what's called
a stall.
A stall can happen if a plane's nose points
too high and loses the ability to fly.
The 737 MAX 8's autopilot is designed to sense
when that is a danger and automatically push
the nose down.
Pilots can override the system by shutting
the autopilot off.
While insisting the plane is safe as it is
now, the FAA says it expects to order fixes
to the system no later than April.
The changes have reportedly been delayed by
disagreements between Boeing and federal regulators
about how extensive they should be.
About 350 Boeing 737 MAX 8's are in operation
worldwide; 58 of them are operated by two
U.S.-based airlines, Southwest and American.
Both carriers are continuing to operate the
jets.
On Capitol Hill, a growing number of lawmakers
say the FAA should ground the planes and look
into the issue.
Connecticut Senator Richard Blumenthal:
SEN.
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D), Connecticut: These
planes are accidents waiting to happen, until
there is some assurance that either pilots
have been better trained or the problems with
the aircraft have been fixed.
JOHN YANG: President Trump weighed in, saying:
"Airplanes are becoming far too complex to
fly.
Pilots are no longer needed, but, rather,
computer scientists from MIT."
But the president didn't publicly call on
the FAA to act differently.
We are joined by Mary Schiavo.
She is a former Transportation Department
inspector general.
She is now a lawyer representing survivors
and victims' families in airline accidents.
That includes a case against Boeing stemming
from the 2014 disappearance of Malaysia Airlines
Flight 370.
Mary Schiavo, thanks so much for joining us.
Just a little bit ago, the FAA put out a statement
repeating that they find no systematic performance
issues and no basis to order the grounding
of this aircraft.
What is your reaction to that?
MARY SCHIAVO, Former Transportation Inspector
General: Well, the two planes have already
crashed.
We don't know the cause yet of the second
one, and FAA's own warnings to Boeing concerning
the repairs that were needed after the Lion
Air crash said that there was a risk of impact
with terrain.
So, it's impossible to say that they're safe,
when two have already crashed and we don't
know why for the second one.
It's completely impossible, oxymoronic.
JOHN YANG: We should note that we asked the
FAA to give us someone to talk to, and they
turned us down.
But they say that that's precisely why, the
fact that they don't know the answer to what
caused these two crashes is precisely why
they are not ordering the grounding.
MARY SCHIAVO: Well, if you don't know why
planes are falling out of the sky, what you're
doing is betting with passengers' lives and
other lives that it won't happen again.
And that's not the purpose of safety regulations.
The purpose of safety regulations -- remember,
an aircraft certification says that the plane
is safe to fly.
It doesn't say, we don't know why it's falling
out of the sky, so we're going to leave it
there.
It's completely the opposite of what safety
regulators are supposed to do.
JOHN YANG: And the FAA also says, it's safe
the fly now.
But, at the same time, they're talking about
modifications to this stall-avoidance system.
And we're also told that there are discussions
between Boeing and the FAA about the parameters
of this fix.
Help us understand the relationship between
regulators and the regulated.
MARY SCHIAVO: Well, unfortunately, you know,
in the case of the FAA and Boeing and other
manufacturers and major carriers, it's a very
symbiotic relationship.
But the FAA has over the years really come
to defer to Boeing and other manufacturers,
Airbus, et cetera, and to the airlines.
And so on issues such as this, the FAA often
takes its cues and its direction from Boeing,
not for sinister reasons, not because somebody
is on the take, but because Boeing has the
greater expertise.
And, over the years, when I was inspector
general, we had many investigations, including
on the certification of the 777, that showed
that the FAA just didn't have the firepower,
didn't have the expertise and the training
and the ability to go toe to toe with Boeing
and other issues in manufacturers over complex
computer issues.
And that's what this is.
They put a computer modification on a plane
to keep it from stalling, didn't tell the
pilots and train them, and then after a second
one went down, now the FAA says they're going
to order Boeing to make changes to that computer
system by April.
So, in the meantime, is it safe?
Well, not according to the FAA.
It can cause impact with terrain.
JOHN YANG: Impact with terrain, a euphemism
for a crash.
You asked that question, is it safe?
You wrote in a blog today, earlier today,
that you wouldn't be comfortable flying on
this model aircraft.
Why?
MARY SCHIAVO: Well, because we don't know
why two have fallen out of the sky, and we
don't know why.
And to me that says you shouldn't be on it
until we do know why.
And they will very soon.
In some ways,this is just astonishing that
people have not been more proactive.
Those black boxes are the best there are.
They're the top-of-the-line models.
They're the newest ones.
They have probably downloaded them already.
And literally within a week, we will know
a cause and can say -- at that point, we can
say whether or not the airplane is safe.
At this point, it's the whole reason we have
a black box, to solve the mystery, so we can
say whether it's safe or not.
So, for me, no, I wouldn't get on it until
we know.
JOHN YANG: And what advice would you give
to the traveling public?
MARY SCHIAVO: Oh, the traveling public.
I mean, the Internet has blown up with this.
The traveling public is already searching
for their own and making their own decisions.
They're being smart consumers and voting with
their feet.
They're all asking, how do I find out if my
plane is one of these, and can I re-book,
get off, or cancel?
JOHN YANG: Mary Schiavo, former inspector
general at the Transportation Department,
thank you very much.
MARY SCHIAVO: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We continue our look now at
migrants crossing the southern U.S. border
and the policy decisions affecting their journey.
Amna Nawaz traveled to Mexico, and the San
Luis port of entry, where families from Central
America and Mexico are facing a months-long
wait to enter the U.S. legally.
AMNA NAWAZ: For thousands of migrants on their
way in or out of the United States, this is
a temporary haven, the Casa del Migrante shelter
in San Luis Rio Colorado in Mexico.
MARTIN SALGADO AMES, Director, Casa del Migrante
(through translator): We give them food.
We give them medical attention when they need
it, and they can spend up to three nights
here.
AMNA NAWAZ: Martin Salgado Ames' family has
run this shelter for decades.
MARTIN SALGADO AMES (through translator):
Until a few months ago, the majority of the
population that came to these shelters were
men, mainly men; 95, 97 percent were men.
The families were in Mexico in their homes,
and the father went to find a job and send
money.
But this started to change drastically when
violence and unemployment started to increase.
Then, entire families started crossing.
AMNA NAWAZ: They come mostly from Honduras
and Guatemala, he says.
But some are from other parts of Mexico, like
Carmen and her kids, 4-year-old Alison and
2-year-old Edwin, from Guerrero, Mexico, 1,800
miles away.
Her husband, she says, has been working in
the U.S. for almost a year.
She's struggled to provide for the family
alone.
CARMEN, Mexico Migrant (through translator):
I want to cross to the other side, because
they say that you can pass with no problem.
Nothing happens.
So, I came, so I could pass and be with my
husband and work with him.
We want to have money and a house.
That's what we want.
AMNA NAWAZ: Carmen came to the shelter to
feed and bathe her family and wash their few
clothes.
She will then walk her kids an hour back to
the sidewalk camp they have called home for
the last seven weeks.
CARMEN (through translator): Where I slept
before was a tarp and a mat that they gifted
me.
It's very cold.
And, yesterday, three women came and gave
me a tent that I'm going to sleep in with
my kids.
AMNA NAWAZ: U.S. officials talk often about
the increase in illegal border crossings,
not the growing backup of families waiting
to enter legally.
This is a line of more than 250 families,
over 1,000-people-long, sheltered under blue
tarps during hot days and sleeping on a freezing
sidewalk overnight.
Many have been here for months, and most are
from Mexico.
The U.S. port of entry is just a few yards
away.
And more families join the line every day.
MAN: Three or four families.
AMNA NAWAZ: Added every day?
And how many families get to enter every day?
MAN: Average, one.
AMNA NAWAZ: One family a day.
Whoever is first maintains this list.
We make our way down the line, talking to
family after family.
How many kids does he have?
MAN: Three, and the other family, another
three.
AMNA NAWAZ: Oh, there's two families living
under here.
Mario says he and his family fled violence
in Guerrero.
Rutilio and Josefina are also from Guerrero.
They want a better education for their four
kids.
Their two sons were actually born in the U.S.
after the family entered illegally years ago.
So, wait a second.
Two of his kids are U.S. citizens?
And they're still making them wait?
MARTIN SALGADO AMES: Yes, because the rest
of the family are from Mexico.
AMNA NAWAZ: While we're there, family number
34 is allowed into the U.S. port of entry.
So, the guys you see in the orange back there
are actually part of a Mexican federal agency
that does humanitarian work.
They go and they help those families who are
waiting in line to get processed and escort
them up when it's their turn.
They're taking a family up right now that's
been waiting for weeks, possibly months, in
that line.
In response to our questions about the pace
of processing families, a U.S. Customs and
Border Protection spokesperson cited capacity
issues, saying they process undocumented persons
as expeditiously as possible, without negating
the agency's overall mission, which includes
counternarcotics, national security, and facilitation
of lawful trade, all requiring a careful balance
of their resources and space.
But immigration advocates, like Laura Belous
of the Arizona-based Florence Project, worry
the slow pace of legal entry may push people
to cross illegally instead.
LAURA BELOUS, Attorney, Florence Project:
When I talk to clients about the reasons why
they come, the first thing that they talk
about is the harm., and the harm that was
so severe that really coming to the United
States was a last resort in terms of having
safety.
Our clients often report that they have suffered
severe harm along the way in terms of assaults,
in terms of robbery.
But they make that trip because they're looking
for safety.
AMNA NAWAZ: Carmen, meanwhile, is stuck.
She can't go home.
But she also can't afford to wait in the line
much longer.
CARMEN (through translator): I only have 200
pesos left, but I'm going to buy food soon.
I don't have any left, because food is expensive
here.
And I don't know if I'm going to have enough
for tomorrow.
AMNA NAWAZ: Carmen, what you will do when
you run out of money?
CARMEN (through translator): Sometimes, my
kids ask for things, and I keep telling my
son that I don't have any money.
Don't ask me for anything.
My daughter, she understands.
But my son, he starts crying, because all
he wants is his cereal and milk.
I am all by myself.
AMNA NAWAZ: Can you tell me about this?
At the shelter, Martin says all he can do
is try to ease their journey, wherever it
may lead.
MARTIN SALGADO AMES: They stand right here,
and they pray, and they...
AMNA NAWAZ: What do they pray for?
MARTIN SALGADO AMES: To cross, and for their
lives -- life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wow, such a powerful story,
Amna.
You were there at the border.
How typical is what you found at this one
border crossing location?
AMNA NAWAZ: Unfortunately, it's not that unique.
We know there is some version of this kind
of backup happening across the border.
We saw it last summer when we were in El -- sorry
-- in El Paso.
U.S. officials were standing at the international
boundary keeping people from entering because
of capacity issues.
An inspector general report later found they're
doing what's called metering.
That's limiting the amount of people who can
enter the ports of entry.
And we now know there is a Trump administration
official policy that asks legal asylum seekers
to stay in Mexico.
They can't come into the U.S. while their
immigration court cases are adjudicated.
It's in place -- in two ports of entry right
now.
And they have said they're going to expand
it across the border in the coming weeks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you showed us some scenes
of what it's like for these people who are
waiting.
They're living in tents, obviously, the mother
being emotional there.
Tell us more about what these people are going
through.
AMNA NAWAZ: You know, the backup, Judy, is
basically taking a vulnerable population and
making them more vulnerable.
What we couldn't show you, but what they did
tell us, was what happens when we're not there.
Often, the kids are sent out to beg for money
during the day.
At night, a lot of the women are forced to
prostitute themselves just to get money to
feed their kids and make ends meet.
Most people can't afford to live in limbo
like that for very, very long.
But the big takeaway from all of this, Judy,
is what we found over both sides of the border,
is that the system isn't working for anyone,
not the U.S. officials who are trying to secure
the border without enough resources to do
so, and not the people on the other side,
the thousands and thousands of families, a
vast majority of whom are fleeing instability
and are not a criminal threat to the U.S.,
who want to cross the border.
So, the question right now that both of those
groups are asking is, what can we do about
it with what we have, and what our lawmakers
going to do about it to try to change the
system to work for everyone?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it is a side of the story
we don't get to see often enough.
It's so important to do this, do this reporting.
Amna, thank you very much.
AMNA NAWAZ: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: High school students and their
parents know all too well just how intense
the competition for college admissions can
be.
But today's announcement from federal prosecutors
was still a shocker.
They arrested and charged 50 people across
the U.S. for participating in a bribery and
cheating scam to get students into elite schools.
The case was called Operation Varsity Blues.
As William Brangham tells us for our weekly
education segment, Making the Grade, the scheme
allegedly included wealthy parents, among
them well-known actresses, college coaches,
and a dishonest college admissions counseling
program.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The scheme revolved in large
part around a college prep business, often
referred to as the Key.
The government said the company's founder,
William Singer, helped students cheat on standardized
tests, and paid roughly $25 million in bribes
to college athletic coaches so that kids could
enter college with fake athletic credentials.
In some instances, the students didn't even
play the sport.
To mask the fraud, some students faces were
actually Photoshopped onto another athlete's
body.
Two well-known actresses, Felicity Huffman
and Lori Loughlin, allegedly paid into the
scheme for their children.
Among the schools targeted were Yale, Georgetown,
Stanford, and UCLA.
And here's how Andrew Lelling, the U.S. attorney
in Massachusetts, characterized this case:
ANDREW LELLING, U.S. Attorney for Massachusetts:
This case is about the widening corruption
of elite college admissions through the steady
application of wealth, combined with fraud.
Every year, hundreds of thousands of hardworking,
talented students strive for admission to
elite schools.
As every parent knows, these students work
harder and harder every year, in a system
that appears to grow more and more competitive
every year.
And that system is a zero-sum game.
For every student admitted through fraud,
an honest, genuinely talented student was
rejected.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For more on this, I'm joined
by Jeffrey Selingo.
He's been covering higher ed in America for
20 years, including for "The Chronicle of
Higher Education," as well as in three of
his own books on the topic.
Welcome back.
JEFFREY SELINGO, Author, "College Unbound:
The Future of Higher Education and What It
Means for Students": It's great to be here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, this is a jaw-dropping
bribery scandal.
I just sort of am gobsmacked by the complexity
of this.
It seems that the bribery falls into two categories
here, cheating on athletics and that role
in admissions, and cheating on standardized
tests.
Can you explain how cheating on the testing
worked?
JEFFREY SELINGO: So, what they did was essentially
get doctor's notes to allow these students
to take the test by themselves with proctors
that were paid off.
And those proctors either had somebody else
take the test for these students, or they
corrected the exam, so that the students would
get higher scores.
Those scores were then reported to the universities,
who, of course, didn't really know who actually
took the test.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And then -- so, obviously,
a higher test score helps you get into schools
no matter what.
But the second part of this is that -- the
bribing of athletic coaches and the creating
of these sort of phony athletic resumes.
Can you explain a little bit?
JEFFREY SELINGO: I mean, this was the most
amazing one to me, because many of these students
didn't even play the sports they were purported
to play and that they recruited for.
And every year, these coaches -- and these
are at high-level institutions, in some cases
at Division I institutions -- they're recruiting
athletes starting in their sophomore and junior
year.
So for these students to not have to play
these sports,and then to get in under that
pretense of those sports, I think, was absolutely
shocking and amazing to me.
And these athletes are given tips in admissions,
right?
They -- all these colleges have to fill teams,
They need a starting pitcher on the -- on
the baseball team.
They need rowers on the crew team, right?
So they need to fill these spots.
And so, every year, athletes are given advantages
in admissions.
And, clearly, these students were as well.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: How significant is that
advantage?
JEFFREY SELINGO: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, for people who are
not familiar with this, the role -- if you
really are a star athlete, can you get into
a school that would really traditionally be
out of your league?
JEFFREY SELINGO: Yes, you can.
I mean, in many of these schools, they are
basically the -- the athletic director or
the coaches come to the admissions team and
say, these are the students we really want.
Now, will they accept the bottom of the bottom
in terms of academics?
Some schools will not.
Other schools will and just basically say,
we will give them kind of academic support
while they -- while they're here.
But, basically, every other part of their
application could be pretty minimal, but as
long as they have athletics on it, it really
does help.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the details that
you touched on here, I just find it so striking.
This is the example in Yale.
And this was a young woman in Southern California
who didn't play soccer.
This -- the guy William Singer helped set
up a phony athletic profile, sort of pretending
that she played on a very competitive team
in Southern California.
They then bribe the Yale soccer coach, $400,000,
to recruit this student, even though the coach
knew that the student had never even put her
foot on a ball.
JEFFREY SELINGO: No, and it's amazing.
I can't even imagine what these other athletes
on the team thought of this.
But, more so, there was probably an athlete
or two that were in the recruiting system
for Yale that didn't get in because this student
or these students got in.
And that's not only true at Yale, but at these
other institutions.
The U.S. attorney talked about it as a zero-sum
game.
I mean, in admissions, to be honest with you,
I think that many more students are not admitted
who are qualified, because the admissions
rate at some of these places is like 8 to
10 percent.
But, in athletics, you're really competing
against one or two other people.
And so, in those cases, I think they probably
took a spot of somebody.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At its core, really, this
is about wealthy parents who are trying to
buy in some ways even more influence for their
wealthy children, right?
JEFFREY SELINGO: I mean, what's amazing to
me is that, in some cases, it wouldn't really
matter where these kids went to college, right?
They have both the means, the financial means,
but also the connections to live a great life
because of their parents, no matter where
they go.
So it's kind of shocking that they really
wanted that piece of paper from an elite college
-- an elite college, because, in many cases,
it wouldn't matter where they went.
And what was interesting to me about the -- about
the ACT and the SAT is that, at many elite
colleges, including...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: These are the standardized
tests.
JEFFREY SELINGO: The standardized tests.
At many elite colleges, including the University
of Chicago last year, they're diminishing
the use of these, right?
University of Chicago went what's called test-optional
last year, where students don't have to submit
test scores.
And at many colleges that I followed over
the years, they kind of use the standardized
test kind of as a check-in.
They're more interested in high school curriculum
and high school grades and other parts of
the application.
So the fact that they spent so much money
on standardized tests, thinking that would
get them into college, in many ways, they
were mistaken.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The criminality aside -- and
we can't emphasize how much that this is breaking
the law with the bribes that were paid -- doesn't
this strike you that this is also an indictment
of the cutthroat nature of college applications?
JEFFREY SELINGO: Yes.
Yes.
I mean, we're seeing this more, that the seats
are scarce at these -- at the selective colleges
and universities.
There are more people every year trying to
get into them.
They represent about a third of applications
every year, even though they only represent
about 18 percent of students, the most elite
colleges.
So the competition to get into them is great.
And yet we know from research that, in many
ways, it doesn't matter where you go to college.
It matters how you go to college, and being
really engaged in your studies and extracurricular
activities, getting internships and other
types of activities matter more.
But yet we want to get into these colleges
because we know the seats are scarce.
We're worried about the future of the economy
and the future of our children.
We want to make sure that they get -- have
all the same privileges that we had.
And so every year, more and more people are
trying to get into these colleges.
And we see this in their application totals,
right?
Everyone's up like 8, 10 percent every year.
And they're getting tens of thousands of applications
and admitting in many cases fewer than 10
percent, in some cases fewer than 5 percent
of applicants.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And, as we see, people are
turning to devious means to try to get in.
JEFFREY SELINGO: Exactly.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Jeffrey Selingo, thank you
very much.
It was great to be with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be back shortly
with the story of a black, Jewish woman fighting
to save lives on the streets of Chicago.
But, first, take a moment to hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your support, which
helps to keep programs like ours on the air.
For those stations staying with us, a look
at a group that has been serving rural communities
in Eastern Kentucky for nearly half-a-century.
Now, in the face of many leaving the area,
it's giving residents new reasons to stay.
Jeffrey Brown brings us this encore story.
JEFFREY BROWN: A cold winter day in the tiny
coal town of Hemphill in Letcher County, Kentucky,
hard-hit by the closing of nearby mines.
But on this Friday, residents have gathered
in the basement of a shuttered-school-turned-community-center
for free food, music, and a celebration of
a tiny, but empowering catering business run
by Gwen Johnson, whose mining family has lived
here for generations.
GWEN JOHNSON, Founder, Hemphill Catering Company:
I was raised in a coal mine family, where
the pride was in the job, but you didn't really
own what you made.
But with Hemphill Catering Company, we own
what we make.
The community will.
JEFFREY BROWN: The business was made possible
through the support of Appalshop, based in
nearby Whitesburg, an arts and culture institution
that, from its very beginnings, has made economic
development part of its mission.
ADA SMITH, Program Director, Appalshop: We
have been so inundated with, this is the way
your life is, these are the options, this
is what you're going to do if you stay here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ada Smith is a program director
at Appalshop, and grew up in Whitesburg.
ADA SMITH: We can tell you, day in and day
out, how many young artists have been told,
if you really want to be an artist, you have
got to leave.
So, you name it.
If you want to be an engineer, you have to
leave.
So, you know, on that level, I feel like Appalshop
has proven that other things can happen here.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Appalshop dates back almost
50 years, created with the help of federal
funds during the so-called war on poverty
of the 1960s.
It was a time when Appalachia was thrust into
the national spotlight.
MAN: Beside these roads, the shacks of tar
paper and pine, which are the homes of a million
permanently poor.
JEFFREY BROWN: Appalshop had two big goals:
to foster new skills and jobs and to give
local people a way to tell their own stories.
Herb E. Smith, Ada's father, was a founding
member of Appalshop.
His father, grandfather and brothers all worked
in the coal mines.
HERB E. SMITH, Filmmaker: He began here in
1952, about when I was born, and he worked
here until '73.
JEFFREY BROWN: But coal jobs were going away,
and so were local residents.
HERB E. SMITH: I graduated from Whitesburg
High School in 1970.
There were 170 of us graduated.
By the end of the summer, less than 50 of
us were here, with no hopes of ever returning.
Generations of people, thousands and millions
of people leave mining areas, and the people
who remain miss them.
Miss them bad.
JEFFREY BROWN: Trained at Appalshop and armed
with cameras, Smith and others took on a new
kind of work.
HERB E. SMITH: It was a way to be a part of
the solution, and to kind of understand the
place that we were a part of.
And, of course, we learned all kind of things
that we had no clue about.
And we kind of fell in love with the place.
JEFFREY BROWN: They produced scores of films,
documenting in frank detail the region they
called home.
HERB E. SMITH: One of the ways I like to say
it is, we make films about the things we like
here, and we make films about the things that
are challenging.
WOMAN: The same system that brought prosperity
to some impoverished others.
Some filmmakers wanted to show that contrast
to help bring about social change.
Others mined the images the way the companies
had mined the coal.
HERB E. SMITH: And then we want to make films
that hold out people like Ralph Stanley, people
who have drawn from the wealth of the culture
of the region and made a living from it.
JEFFREY BROWN: And Appalshop expanded well
beyond filmmaking.
Its Roadside Theater, captured in this 1991
"NewsHour" report, continues to present plays
about life in the region.
Its radio station, WMMT, offers a range of
music and news, with the help of some 50 volunteer
deejays.
Local musicians offer after-school lessons
for kids learning to play bluegrass.
Downstairs, Appalshop's film vaults hold virtually
every minute of film and video from the last
50 years, and now house historic photography
collections.
The filmmaking continues with a new generation;
24-year-old Oakley Fugate grew up in a nearby
town with a population of just 20.
Without Appalshop, he says, his options were
limited.
OAKLEY FUGATE, Filmmaker: When it comes to
artistic dreams and stuff like mine, they're
just kind of like, no, you need to do something
serious.
Like, they don't -- they don't even consider
the possibility of you actually doing it.
JEFFREY BROWN: But after a training program,
he's produced several documentaries, including
a recent film spotlighting a transgender student
in Whitesburg.
STUDENT: I'm not scared to the trans anymore.
I'm not scared or ashamed of it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Most important, says Ada Smith,
Appalshop continues its focus on how art and
culture can stimulate a local economy.
ADA SMITH: If people want to come downtown
for things.
If there's music, if there's events, if there's
things to do, then, all of a sudden, there's
more businesses.
If people have an opportunity to try some
different things, then all of a sudden they
are like, whoa, I could start a record store,
I could start a tattoo parlor, I could start
a bar.
Like, your mind just opens up from an initial
nugget of trying something different.
JEFFREY BROWN: Appalshop relies on federal
funding, including the NEA, foundations, and
private philanthropy.
And all that, Smith says, only goes so far.
ADA SMITH: I just really believe that there's
been a long history of only seeing rural communities
and economies as places to take from, and
not places to invest in.
JEFFREY BROWN: And Appalshop says otherwise,
huh?
(LAUGHTER)
ADA SMITH: yes.
We feel like there's a lot of wealth and talent
and ideas that need to be given a chance.
JEFFREY BROWN: Like those of Gwen Johnson
at the community center in Hemphill.
Her work is now part of an expanded support
network that Appalshop has helped build, with
more than a dozen businesses and organizations
in the area.
Her site faced closure when funds from coal
taxes dried up, but with encouragement and
support from Appalshop, including $5,000 in
seed money, Johnson was able to start a catering
company to help pay the bills.
GWEN JOHNSON: They're friends who kind of
stepped up to the plate and began to think
outside the box, and sometimes they think
bigger than some of us have ever been allowed
to think.
JEFFREY BROWN: She now employs local residents,
including recovering addicts from the Letcher
County Drug Court.
BRADLEY JOHNSON, Hemphill Catering Company:
And our applications, when they see our background,
it just goes to the very bottom, you know?
And Gwen overlooks that and gives us a chance
to prove ourselves.
And I really appreciate the opportunity.
JEFFREY BROWN: And now, with another $15,000
from Appalshop, Johnson plans to build a brick
oven and open a bakery to serve healthier
breads to the community.
She's calling it Black Sheep Bakery.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jeffrey Brown
in Letcher County, Kentucky.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This week's "NewsHour" Facebook
watch show, "That Moment When," features Tamar
Manasseh.
She's the founder of MASK, Mothers and Men
Against Senseless Killing.
Manasseh tells us how she is able to win people
over to her cause using her background, growing
up as a Jewish woman of color on Chicago's
South Side.
QUESTION: What does it feel like to have the
international media storm Chicago on its worst
days with the high number of shootings and
killings?
TAMAR MANASSEH, Founder, Mothers and Men Against
Senseless Killings: I don't feel anything.
I think the mayor should feel something.
I think the superintendent of police should
feel something.
People like me, who are out here every day,
who are trying to make the difference, who
are making the difference, who do the work,
we see that our efforts are actually doing
something, even if the international media
doesn't recognize it.
It's not about that.
It's about the lives that you save.
When I leave here, I'm going to go home, I'm
going to put on some warm clothes, and I'm
going to head to the block, because, tonight,
we're having a sukkah soiree.
There's this idea.
If we can find where bad things are going
to happen, if we know that bad things are
happening between these two warring factions,
you send some moms over there, you send some
moms over there, and we just sit there.
And we have, hands down, the best sukkah on
the South Side of Chicago.
No one would ever expect to see Jews of all
colors dancing to "Hava Nagila" played by
a jazz band on a street corner in the middle
of the hood.
But that's what you're going to see tonight.
Being around a barbecue grill is going to
give us some time to talk, to get to know
each other.
It takes time for food to get ready.
So, while we're talking, food's going to be
cooking.
You're going to get to know me, and I'm going
to get to know you.
And then, once the food comes off the grill,
we're going to be mid-conversation.
So, you aren't going to just walk away, because
we're having a good conversation.
And then you know what?
Tomorrow, you're going to come back and we're
going to do it again.
And then you're going to come back the day
after, and we're going to do it again.
And that's what built community around that
barbecue grill and around that corner.
That's what did it.
It was food and good conversation and genuine
concern.
It is the way that I bring people together.
It is the way that I bridge the gap.
The most Jewish thing that I can do is sit
on a corner and make sure that people are
treated justly and make sure that they have
food, and make sure that everybody is treated
with respect and dignity.
It is part of tikkun olam.
It is a crack in the world.
And if you see the crack, you have to try
to repair the crack.
It's up to you to try to repair the flaw.
That's what it is.
Everybody else sees problems.
I see cracks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tamar Manasseh.
The group is MASK.
You can watch all episodes of our series on
Facebook @thatmomentwhenshow.
And that is the "NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and we'll see you soon.